# Midterm Project
[Google Drive Link](https://drive.google.com/drive/folders/1z7L9FU9uQXuSIP81TJyDwnoBSd_iEa7v?usp=sharing)
### What you did (the artifact you produced and/or what you built)
For my midterm project, I created an interactive musical experience inspired by biofeedbacking. The system for this interactive experience can be used by one user at a time in a quiet environment. The system utilizes heart beat data using an optical heart rate sensor which the user can place on their neck, where their pulse is located. The user may also place this sensor on their wrist to detect their heart rate; however, neck placement has shown to be the most accurate and effective. When the sensor detects a heart beat has occured, this triggers a specific musical sample of a triangle hit. This interactive system also triggers different samples when the audio input recieves particular sounds. There are five signals/sounds that trigger unique samples: silence, shhh, aaaa, inhale, and exhale. When silence is detected the chords play, shhh triggers a Native Playbox sound effect, aaa triggers a "ha" sound, an inhale will trigger a flute sample, and exhale will trigger a different flute sample. It is important to note that the inhale and exhale must be loud and dramatic so that the system can accurately detect these sounds. The user can control the timing of the samples and thus create their own unique musical output by controlling the times at which they make the five vocalizations to trigger the different samples. They may also relax or exercise in order to alter their heart rates to control the timing of the triangle sample. The user may listen to the music the system is outputting by wearing headphones so that the audio output does not make it difficult to identify the vocalizations/sounds. 


### How machine learning is involved (e.g. model, data, tools, or concepts you used)
For my machine learning implementation, I decided to use [Wekinator](https://doc.gold.ac.uk/~mas01rf/Wekinator/) for its dynamic time warping (DTW) capabilities. Since Wekinator has a straightforward user interface that is easy to use and was made for musicians in mind, I felt that this would be perfect because I wouldn't need to write code line by line. This provided more time for me to think about the specific samples I wanted to use in order to curate a captivating musical experience. I had a little extra time to record and process the flute samples and design the chord progression sample as well. Additionally, Wekinator communicates through OSC messages which makes it compatible with Max. This way, I could send audio input information to Wekinator via the prepend and udpsend object and then recieve the OSC messages from Wekinator with udprecieve. I could then trigger samples from udprecieve by selecting the gesture using the route object and have audio play from Max. 

#### Dynamic Time Warping in Wekinator
With Wekinator, a real-time dynamic time warping model can easily be made. As described by [Speech recognition using Dynamic Time Warping (DTW) by Yurika Permanasari et al.](https://iopscience.iop.org/article/10.1088/1742-6596/1366/1/012091/pdf), dynamic time warping is an algorithm that compares and calculates the optimal warping path between two pieces of data from sound. As the paper states, "the output of this algorithm is the path warping values and distance between the two data". This essentially means that the algorithm is determining how similar the two pieces of data are to each other. This is helpful in the case that the model is trained with a certain word but that word is spoken more slowly. The model will still be able to match those two words together because it is considering the warping values and how far apart those two words are from each other. As the paper explains, "The DTW algorithm is intended to align two vector sequences by turning the time axis
repeatedly until the optimal match between the two sequences is found." In Wekinator this is depicted by a meter called "degree of match" and a threshold can manually be adjusted in Wekinator so that the algorithm is more or less sensitive to incoming sounds. I used the [Wekinator tutorial video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PsLm9Vjmero) to get an idea about how the interface works and this inspired me to try using vocalizations instead of specific words for my project. 

##### Training DTW Model 
Training the DTW model in Wekinator seemed quite simple but required some experimentation to work effectively. Wekinator makes it so that you can record sounds immediately to serve as the training data so that the model can the detect those sounds when running. The first time I trained the model, I created the five gestures and trained them with approximately seventy examples each. For some reason, I noticed that even though I was using a ton of training examples to refine the model, it was becoming less and less effective. I thought this might be because I was recording slightly different sounds so that not every sound was quite the same, and I was also recording these samples in different places. Some of the places I was recording from might have had too much background noise so I set up a fresh model and rerecorded. This time, I recorded in a sound attenuated room and made sure that every sound I recorded per gesture was as similar as possible with only very slight discrepancies. This seemed to work the best and was most effective. 

#### Helpful Tool in Max for ML: Zsa.Descriptors
In order to feed audio input via OSC into Wekinator I started my first attempt by using the fast fixed filter bank object in Max in order to create 13 bandpass filters to bin the incoming audio. I converted the signal from amplitude values to dB values and scaled the values but this ultimately was unsuccessful. Though Wekinator could recieve 13 inputs, the speech recognition and sounds were not being recognized with much accuracy. I then experimented with the "all classifiers" type model in Wekinator but this was also ineffective. I then looked into mel spectrograms and mel-frequency cepstral coefficients. After looking through some [Max forums](https://cycling74.com/forums/zsa-descriptors-1-0-released) I discovered an external Max library developed by Mikhail Malt and Emmanuel Jourdan that was created for real-time sound analysis called [Zsa.Descriptors](https://www.e--j.com/index.php/what-is-zsa-descriptors/). Using the zsa.easy_mfcc~ object was extremely helpful and simple to implement. This replaced all the scaling and filtering I did before and it worked the best in Wekinator for specific sound recognition. 

### What you learned or what new skill or understanding you developed

#### MFCCS
Though my first attempt at conditioning the audio input from my microphone so that it's Wekinator compatible was unsuccesful, I still feel that I learned a lot about how to process audio in Max. I also learned more about MFCCS and how this is more desirable for speech/sound/timbral recognition because it captures how humans percieve pitch and loudness and prioritizes the energy/intensity of sound. Before learning about Zsa.Descriptors, I tried to see what I needed to do in order to get the MFCCS using filters in Max using [DataMListic's MFCC Explained video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=SJo7vPgRlBQ) and realized that this would be more complex than simply adding triangluar filter banks. Deriving MFCCs also involves windowing and discrete cosine transform which would be far too inconvinient to do in Max.

#### Wekinator, DTW, Max
Creating this project introduced me to Wekinator and has made me more comfortable with the features and interface, specifically the DTW model. I learned more about what DTW is actually doing in order to recognize sounds and how this is depicted in Wekinator with the threshold and "degree of match" meter. Additionally, I learned how to send and recieve OSC messages in Max using udpsend and udprecieve since UDP is a protocol for OSC. Implementing the heart rate sensor also taught me about how to run serial data into Max and how to use that data to trigger a sample. In terms of sample triggering, I didn't want the chords sample to keep retriggering everytime silence was detected because the sample wouldn't be able to finish playing. From this mishap, I learned (with help from the EPD tutor) how to use a gate and boolean logic in order to stop the chords sample from retriggering before the sample finished playing. Lastly, I learned about how Loopback can be used as a tool to send the audio output from Max into Logic so that the audio from my interactive experience could be recorded. 


### Reflection: challenges, what you would do differently, and how the results compare to your expectations 
Overall, I'm quite happy with what I was able to accomplish and I think I created a pleasant musical experience. Some challenges is that it feels pretty clunky to practically use. The heart rate sensor needs some time to calibrate and the user needs to hold it to their neck the entire time. I think a better sensor could perhaps make this better. Another challenge is that headphones must be worn because otherwise the audio output will inevitably impact the audio input, thus making it difficult to accurately detect the trigger sounds. This is not necessarily a major issue if it were an installation but I'm not sure how it could be used in a live performance setting. A third challenge is that sometimes the inhales and exhales will trigger each other. Even though I trained the model on very specific inhale and exhale sounds, if I accidentally make them too similar due to performance error, both samples will trigger. This leads to my fourth challenge which is that only I can most effectively use the model because I know exactly how I trained the models so I can best replicate those sounds with my voice. Somethings I would do differently if I had more time would be to add more gestures to trigger other samples so perhaps I could train a gesture on flute sounds so I could play my flute with the triggered sample. I would also like to have the heart rate sensor trigger the sidechain in a compressor so that it could create a pumping effect in the overall sound of the composition instead of triggering a sample constantly. Compared to my inital expectations of just having the heart rate sensor, I think this is better than my expectations since I added the vocalizations but the breathing identification wasn't what I had expected. I wanted the microphone to pick up a normal inhale and exhale so I wouldn't need to make a dramatic breathing sound; however, I understand it is unrealistic unless I have an incredible sensitive microphone. Even still, Wekinator might not be able to identify a difference between the normal inhales and exhales. 



