# Moises Tool Evaluation 
## Complete Project Assets 
[Google Drive](https://drive.google.com/drive/folders/1nYhdCVFZUxTgJGQB0zldDOFSlei1np_n?usp=sharing)
## What is it?
Moises AI is a closed source, commercial product that offers a desktop and mobile app. Moises AI Studio, for desktop, is an AI powered DAW that allows the user to use tools such as stem separation, AI mixing and mastering, lyric generation, and audio generation based on text input. It also has a library of different voices that can be used to replace speech and singing. Additionally, Moises can analyze and alter the chords of a song, the key, and the tempo. The mobile app is similar in that it offers tools such as chord identification, stem generation, alterations to tempo, and key; however, it is more limited in its features, as it primary offers stem splitting without the DAW like appearance of visualizing the audio files and it is without the mixing/mastering options. 
## How is it using AI?
### Stem Splitting AI
Moises uses AI in order to identify different instruments and characteristics of the musical elements to a song (i.e. tempo, key, rhythmn), for the purpose of stem splitting. Though Moises is not open-source, we can extrapolate how it works by evaluating other AI stem splitter tools such as Spleeter. As explained by Keagan Pang's article, [Deezer’s Spleeter: Deconstructing music with AI](https://d3.harvard.edu/platform-digit/submission/deezers-spleeter-deconstructing-music-with-ai/), the Paris music streaming service called Deezer, released a machine learning tool called Spleeter which performs stem separation. [Spleeter](https://github.com/deezer/spleeter) is open-source and written in Python based on Tensorflow. Spleeter works by using a technique called time-frequency masking in which all the frequencies that make a mix are essentially filtered so that particular instruments that occupy different frequencies can be isolated into stems. We can assume that perhaps Moises works similarly. In order to train these models to indentify particular instruments in a mix, [Moises](https://help.moises.ai/hc/en-us/articles/21894242064284-What-are-the-AI-Studio-models-trained-on) has stated that they trained all of the AI Studio models on "a diverse foundation of fully licensed, high‑quality data". They have worked with "leading content providers, along with independent labels, artists, and our own internal production team" in order to train the models to generate stems for instruments and vocals. 
### Audio Generation
In terms of generating audio from text and specific tags, we can assume that Moises does this similarly to how many Text-to-Speech models work. These models, such as Stable Audio, function by the use of U-Net diffusion models that use text prompts or audio to generate new audio. As explained in an article by 
Louis-François Bouchard, [Generate music with AI: Stable Audio Explained](https://www.louisbouchard.ai/stableaudio/), diffusion models for audio work very similarly to diffusion models for images, in that spectrogram information can be encoded by the part of the neural network called the encoder. The original audio sample will have noises added to it and the model will essentially recover the audio based on the audio it was trained on. This is what the decoder does in order to make it so audio can be generated. Since Moises is working with text prompts this is specifically the "CLAP Text encoder that they train to transform the text input into a good representation for our generative model". This was tags and keywords can be used and associated with generating particular audio stems.  
## Workflow Walk-Through 
I started approaching my composition by thinking about how I would compose one of my original pieces without much consideration of how well Moises would be able to accomodate my specific needs. I decided to compose an experimental speech based piece using a one minute excerpt from Hasan Minhaj's comedy special, Homecoming King. I also had an idea to implement Hindustani influenced melodic ideas and ambiances and was curious as to what Moises could generate based on the one audio file I provided it.

### Initial Notes: Moises is not a "real" DAW + PRO Plan
I started by trying to approach Moises like any other DAW that I've had experience with; however, I found myself getting frustrated with the lack of quick key commands. I dropped in my initial speech audio file from the comedy set and tried to chop up the sample and drag those clips into new tracks but this was not possible. In order to make these sort of edits that should be quick, I had to click the three dots on the track I wanted to edit and drag my mouse to click a button to trim the audio. I also could not figure out where to add elements such as EQ since I felt the UI was almost too clean in that it makes very simple functions very obvious such as the panning and general volume levels, but there is no meter to see how the levels change as the audio plays. Additionally, more complicated additions such as adding plugins does not seem to even be an option. It is then that I learned a lot of features, such as using plugins, requires a paid PRO plan.  

### Generating Guitar
I tried to use Moises stem generation tool in order to generate an ambiant background to be behind the speech track. I typed in "Ambient background inspired by sufi/hindustani music" and then Moises added some additional tags such as "drone and meditative" which I suppose makes sense given the drones in Hindustani music; however, the audio it had generated did not span the entire clip of audio for the speech. Since I was more interested in Hindustani instrumentation (not just a drone), I decided to also try being more specific and specifying "sitar"; however, Moises generated a guitar sound. I then decided to just settle with guitar and see if I could be inspired by some of the melodies Moises could generate. For my first attempt I used the text prompt: background guitar to accompany while someone is talking about a sad story with Sufi music influence. I felt that the melody didn't really interest me so I decided to try being more obvious and hopefully get more creative and emotional melodies and try another prompt: background guitar to accompany while someone is talking about a sad story with Hindustani music influence and make the guitar very sporatic and have a fluid tempo. I specific that I wan't the part to be sporatic and fluid because I felt that the past iteration was too rhythmic and highlighted the a clear tempo too obviously. I thought this took away from the emotional story depicted by the speech. I ended up with a much better result. It wasn't as sporatic as I had hoped but much more so than before. I asked moises to regenerate the end few seconds of this guitar part in order to make it sadder and it was able to respond to that feedback. 

### Generating Violin 
I wanted to see how it could handle specific musical terms, especially if I used musical terms that are from non-Western musical cultures. I asked Moises to generate a violin stem with this text input: Generate a violin melody using Raag Todi scale and include oscillations of this raag. I like that the melody it created left space in order to follow the speech audio's pauses, but I feel like it wasn’t really Raag Todi and the oscillations were not really present. The guitar did a better bend than the violin did and I didnt even use the term “oscillation” for the guitar stem prompt. I then decided to automate the volume to change at certain points in the violin track but this was not an option in Moises which was pretty disapointing since I feel this is an essential tool within any DAW. 

### Experimentation: Generating Percussion + Voice Changer 
#### Percussion
I wanted to experiment with some of Moises capabilities in modeling a reference track so I used an audio clip from The Koreatown Oddity's song [INDIFFERENT](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=r-DGUoOpQUg&list=RDr-DGUoOpQUg&start_radio=1). I provided the full audio clip to Moises for the reference track for the percussion specifically but the output audio was really nothing like the reference track mostly because the timbres were totally different. In The Koreatown Oddity track there is a wood block timbre and cow bell timbre but the generated audio was much more metallic and tin sounding. I then put the audio for the Koreatown Offity track into the stem splitting tool and realized that the maximum stems it can split in the free version of the software is Voice, Drums, Keys, and Other. The wood block, cow bell, and saxophone were all put into Other. Additionally, there was a little bit of bleed between the stems with some high hat from the Drums track present in some of the other stems. Overall, though, the stem splitting tool was quite effective with the four stems it was able to extract from the input. 
#### Voice Changer
Next, I also wanted to try the Voice Changer capabilities and record directly into Moises. I recorded myself saying "Hasan, be brave." and then selected a voice called Ashanti to change my voice to. I feel that this worked quite well. I then decided to see how much I could push the voice changer so I converted the entire speech track to a different voice. Since the speech track had some sections in which the speaker is rushing and speaking in a naturally fast pace, the voice changer was not perfect. Some words were unintelligible, but for the most part, the voice changer was able to maintain all the clearly spoken words that weren't rushed. 

### Finishing the Composition
To finish the composition I selected the guitar audio, violin, "Ashanti" speech, and some kick samples from the generated percussion track. I exported these tracks to Ableton Live 12 in order to process them with reverb and chop the audio files so I could control the arrangement better. I used SpaceBlender Reverb and Ableton stock plugins for the compressor and limiter. I also used Ableton to pitch shift the audio files and warp them in various ways. 

### Pre-Processed Composition (only Moises)
<audio controls>
  <source src="Pre-Processed Composition.mp3" type="audio/mpeg">
  Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>

### Post-Processed Composition (Moises + Ableton)
<audio controls>
  <source src="Bethany.mp3" type="audio/mpeg">
  Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>

## Strengths 
Moises has a very attractive interface that looks very clean and easy to use, especially for someone who has never tried music production before. It is not overwhelming and seems very approachable. The free version of Moises AI Studio is most effective at stem splitting and identifying the key, tempo, chords, and lyrics of songs. It is also great to generate very quick stems for common western pop music instruments such as keys, drum, and bass. I also feel that it does a great job with the voice changers, as it offers a whole library of different voices to choose from with different ranges and timbres. I also liked that this was available for the free version. The mastering tool also seemed to produce a pretty decent master of the unmastered composition that I had exported from Ableton; however, unfortunately the mastered output could not be exported with the free version so it was practicially unusable. If you did pay for the pro version, Moises offers many options to export masters as high quality audio files at different loudness levels suitable for different streaming platforms. I also appreciated that Moises would accept many different file options for audio input, including video files. This is useful to me because I was able to insert my screen recording of the speech from Hasan Minhaj's comedy set. 
## Weaknesses 
In terms of weaknesses, my main issue is that Moises AI Studio is not really a DAW in that it lacks many important capabilities. though its simplistic user interface can be a positive for some, it can leave much to be desired for more experienced music producers. It does not offer fast editing due to the lack of key commands, has no where to insert external plugins, shows no level monitoring per track, and does not allow for programming automation. Additionally, another drawback is that it is only successful at producing western pop music and does not understand different cultural music terms such as the terminology of Hindustani music. Since the software is primarily for pop music, it tends to generate stems that play throughout the composition and has a hard time generating stems that play very sporatically so it isn't quite ideal for more experimental styles music. Since I used a speech track instead of a singing track as audio input, it is to be expected that Moises was not able to identify the sad or tense parts of the story to be expressed in the music, because ultimately, Moises cannot understand what the words mean. This is a major reason why it was so important that I do most of the editing of the generated stems within a different DAW. 
### Pro Version 
Perhaps one of the largest weaknesses of Moises is that many features can only be accessed with the paid Pro Version. I found this frustrating because features such as a setting for more "creatively generated" stems would be presented but then when clicked on, the Pro Version tab would appear. With the Pro version, the stem splitter tool could split into more tracks and the user would actually be able to export the masters and use AI mixing; however, without the Pro version I feel that I couldn't fully critique everything Moises had to offer. Also, without the Pro Version, you cannot export more than 1 minute of audio, making music production frustrating if you choose to only rely on the free version. 

## Final Thoughts + Reflections 
 Overall, the free version of Moises AI Studio can be a useful tool in tandem with another DAW for music production. Though, it is not suitable for all musical genres and styles, it may be used to identify key features of a song and perform stem splitting. It would best be used to create short jingles, demos, or small audio clips to then be further processed in another DAW that could offer more control to the user in terms of processing and arrangement.  





