# Final Project Documentation 
[Google Drive Link](https://drive.google.com/drive/folders/1_i21STJHdOOzzP-Ll3sr5fx0XyBzlLDl?usp=sharing)


## What I made 
For my project, I made a interactive musical system that activates certain live audio processing effects. Different effects activate depending on the "pose" or position in which I am holding my flute; this way, I don't need to take my hands off the instrument and worry about clicking effects on and off while performing. 

## How Machine Learning is Involved 
Machine learning is involved through the use of MediaPipe and Wekinator. MediaPipe is being used by identifying three different poses in which I am holding the flute using the Pose Landmarker Task. Drawing inspiration from the MediaPipe example code from class as well as [Ethan's MediaPipe example](https://github.com/berklee-epd/mtec345-homework/tree/ethan-bessette-final/ethan-bessette/final) that is effectively using the Pose Landmarker Task, OSC is being sent from MediaPipe to Wekinator. In Wekinator, I am using All Classifiers with the support vector machine algorithm in order to identify three different classes (which are the three different poses). 

## How you implemented the Project 
I implemented the project by having Media Pipe collect data about the poses and then sending that data via OSC to Wekinator. Wekinator then recognizes the different poses which then can be identified in Max using the udpreceieve object. In Max, there are three different live audio processing effects: reverb, bitcrusher (w/some reverb), and delay which only turn on when a particular pose is identified. This was accomplished using the gate and select objects so that each effect only turns on when one particular pose is identified. Specifically, pose 2 was the delay, pose 1 was reverb, and pose 3 was the bitcrusher. 


## What did I Learn 
Through this project I got a better sense of a different type of algorithm I could use with Wekinator, since prior to this project, I had only really used the Dynamic Time Warping in Wekinator. Additionally, I had never tried making live audio processing effects in Max before so I did some experimentation and consulted [xlfph's Max Tutorial YouTube video for guidance](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JoElwILrLKI). I also learned about reverbs in Max and [Nathan Wolek's nw.gverb~](https://cycling74.com/forums/nw-gverb-cverb) from a forum post, which I ended up using. Since my initial plan was to have MediaPipe use both the Pose Landmarker Task and the Face Landmarker Task, I tried having both work in Wekinator but learned that Wekinator can only have one input. I also learned that Wekinator is not that sensitive and having more than three poses would cause difficulties in recognition, as Wekinator would randomly switch between the classifiers. This was too unstable so I just settled on three poses. 

## Reflection: challenges, unfinished work, and what I would change
### Challenge: What happened to my eyebrow idea???
Last week, I had set out to have Max take on the incoming data from MediaPipe for the Face, since Wekinator cannot use the Face and Pose for two inputs. I adjusted the code for MediaPipe in my browser so that the face landmarker task data points would be packaged to OSC and use a different port to be recieved in Max, whilst the Pose data was sent to Wekinator. I was able to recieve the face points in Max. I adjusted the face-key-indices.ts file, so that only the eyebrows and a single chin point at the tip of the chin would be used. I was going to average the eyebrows and compare their distance to the chin point. After consulting the EPD tutor (Ethan), we had thought that using javascript in Max could help parse the data. I tried to do this and used the code that Ethan recomended; however, it was unsuccessful. I have left this in the project folder and max file for the sake of documentation, but I needed to switch approaches. I thought that perhaps the issue was that the data was just changing way too quickly to be handled, so I decided to try making things simpler and just using three facial points. One for each eyebrow and the chin. I consulted Gemini, and it was recomended to use the unpack object and isolate the y coordinates of each eyebrow and chin since I need to look at the distance between the points for heights. Unfortunately, the difference between the chin and eyebrows was represented numerically in numbers that were far too close together and too small. This was very confusing because in the MediaPipe webcam overlay, it was clear the distance was changing. I still don't know why the eyebrows and chin barely had any difference in y coordinate data. 
### Challenge: Too Many Poses 
Last week, I had also mentioned that I was able to make five poses identifiable in Wekinator, and although this is true, I had to be sitting in a very specific position in relationship to the camera to get all five to clearly be identified. Additionally, it felt unnatural and uncomfortable to play in all those different positions so I ended up limiting it to three and excluded the sample playback idea since I had a limited number of poses/triggers to work with for the final project. 
### Unfinished/Future Changes
Ultimately, I still want to work on the eyebrows because I feel like the eyebrows being raised should be an easy and identifiable thing. Perhaps instead of Max, I can try packaging the Pose and Face OSC messages together and training Wekinator with that one combined input? I also want to see if I can implement jitter since that was my stretch goal. 
